[doc] Custom maps design (#4882)
microsoft/ebpf-for-windows: docs/CustomMaps.md

# Introduction

This document contains proposal for adding support for custom maps. Custom maps are program type specific or global
map types that can be implemented / coordinated by eBPF extensions (e.g. BPF_MAP_TYPE_XSKMAP) through a new NMR
(Network Module Registrar) provider interface. This document contains the design for adding support for custom maps
in eBPF-for-Windows. Custom maps enable extensions to register and manage their own map types beyond those provided
by the core eBPF runtime.

> Custom maps will be based on one of the underlying / base map types already implemented in eBPFCore. When extensions

Reviewer: After reading the rest of this, it seems like this is not a MUST. However, initial implementation will be that we only support existing map types. I think this is fine and clear enough.

declare a new custom map type, they also declare the base map type on which the custom map should be based.
For example, BPF_MAP_TYPE_XSKMAP can be based on the existing BPF_MAP_TYPE_HASH_MAP.
With this approach, eBPFCore can implement the custom map, and extensions will provide hooks / callbacks for map
creation, and CRUD operations on the map.

> This approach has a benefit that extensions do not need to re-implement a performant, RCU (Read-Copy-Update) aware data structure and can leverage the implementation that is present in eBPFCore.

Author: We will not have any custom map implementations in this case. The extension will still provide a dispatch table, and it will be notified of map creation, deletion, and all map CRUD operations.

The base map implementation in ebpfcore is the one that will actually be used for storing entries.

Global maps will use IDs from 1 to 4095. Custom maps will use IDs 4096 onwards.

- **Global Maps (1-4095)**: Reserved for core eBPF runtime map types (hash, array, etc.)
- **Custom Maps (4096+)**: Available for extension-implemented custom map types

Note: Extensions **should** register the map types for the custom maps by creating a pull request to eBPF-for-Windows
repository and updating `ebpf_map_type_t` enum in ebpf_structs.h. This helps in any map type collision with another
extension.

## Map Discovery and Creation

**Dynamic Provider Discovery**: Uses NMR's built-in discovery mechanism
- No central registry required - providers are discovered on-demand during map creation
- When a map is created with a custom type (>= 4096), eBPF core:
  1. Creates an `ebpf_custom_map_t` structure with NMR client characteristics
  2. Calls `NmrRegisterClient()` to find a provider for the specific map type
  3. On successful provider attachment, creates the custom map with the provided base map type.
  4. Returns map handle to user application

**Map Creation Flow**:
```
User calls bpf_create_map(BPF_MAP_TYPE_CUSTOM, ...)
    ↓
ebpfapi validates parameters
    ↓

> ebpfcore checks if map_type >= 4096

Reviewer 2: That can be done, for example, by the implementation having an entry (e.g., in an array) with null function pointers. Or by having a list of extensible map types, etc.  I wouldn't expect there to be more than a few tens of them.  I don't feel that strongly though so if everyone else thinks it's ok then ok.

    ↓
ebpfcore registers new map NMR client for the map instance
    ↓
NMR finds and attaches to provider implementing the custom map type
    ↓
ebpfcore creates actual map instance
    ↓
Map handle returned to user
```

## Verification
- No impact on verification (online or offline), as the verifier only cares about the actual map definitions.

## Map Lifecycle
**Provider Binding**: eBPF core maintains map lifecycle and coordinates with extensions for map creation, deletion,
and othr map operations.
- eBPF core creates a corresponding map entry for each custom map.
- For Map CRUD operations, corresponding dispatch functions provided by the extension will be invoked.
- Map lifetime managed by eBPF core, including proper cleanup coordination.
- Map pinning handled by eBPF core as it impacts map lifetime.

**Note**: Extensions with active maps cannot unload / restart until the map is deleted.

## Map CRUD APIs

### User-mode APIs
All existing libbpf APIs work unchanged with custom maps

> - `bpf_create_map()` / `bpf_map_create()` - Creates custom maps when type >= 4096

Author: Updated text.

following scenarios:
1. **Map Creation** -- eBPF runtime will invoke `process_map_create` to validate the key and value sizes, and optionally
get actual value size.
2. **Map Deletion** -- eBPF runtime will invoke `process_map_delete` to notify the extension that the map is being deleted.
3. **CRUD operations** -- For each CRUD operation, eBPF runtime will invoke the corresponding dispatch function to notify extension. In case of update functions, extension can optionally provide a different value to be stored in the map.

In the above dispatch table, `process_map_create`, `process_map_delete` and `process_map_associate_program` are required
to be non-NULL. If the extension intends to update the actual value size during map creation, other fields in the table
also need to be non-NULL, otherwise eBPFCore will fail the map creation. If extension does not intend to update the
actual value size during map creation, these fields can be optionally NULL.

**Client Services** (provided by eBPF core):
```c
typedef struct _ebpf_map_client_dispatch_table {
    ebpf_extension_header_t header;
    ebpf_map_find_element_t find_element_function;

>     epoch_allocate_with_tag_t epoch_allocate_with_tag;

Reviewer 3: Thanks, can you provide a minimal but complete example of how these APIs would be used by an extension? If XDP only needs to store a `void*` in the value of a map entry, does it need to use epoch allocate/delete at all?

It does need some lifetime management, of course, because deleting the map entry means XDP should release a reference on the target of the `void*`, but otherwise should not have to directly free memory?

>     epoch_allocate_with_tag_t epoch_allocate_with_tag;

Author: >not releasing its final reference within process_map_delete

I think it can release the last reference, and call epoch_free. The memory will not be freed until all the threads with epoch <= freed_epoch have exited epoch.

    ebpf_process_map_find_element_t process_map_find_element;
    ebpf_preprocess_map_element_addition_t preprocess_map_element_addition;
    ebpf_preprocess_map_element_deletion_t preprocess_map_element_deletion;
} ebpf_base_map_provider_dispatch_table_t;
```

### Provider Dispatch Function Signatures

The function pointer types used in the dispatch table are defined in `ebpf_extension.h`. An extension (provider)
needs to implement the dispatch table. The eBPF runtime invokes these functions as described below.

`process_map_create`, `process_map_delete`, and `associate_program_function` are required to be non-NULL. If the
extension sets `updates_original_value` to true, the CRUD callback fields (`process_map_find_element`,
`preprocess_map_element_addition`, `preprocess_map_element_deletion`) must also be non-NULL, otherwise eBPFCore will fail the
map creation. If `updates_original_value` is false, these CRUD fields can be optionally NULL.

---

#### `ebpf_process_map_create_t` — Map Creation (required)

eBPF runtime invokes `process_map_create` to validate the key and value sizes, allocate a provider-defined per-map

> context, and optionally return a different `actual_value_size`. The extension allocates a map context and returns a

Reviewer 2: To confirm: this does the actual map creation, it is neither pre- nor post- what the base map implementation does?  If it's pre- then it should be renamed.

Author: Updated.

pointer to it (`map_context`) back to the eBPF runtime. Subsequent callbacks for this map receive this `map_context`
as an input parameter.

Note: When a map lookup happens from user mode, the value is copied into the buffer provided by the user, whereas
when a map lookup happens from a BPF program, a pointer to the value is provided to the program, and the program
can read or modify the value in place. Therefore, for maps where an extension intends to *modify* the actual value
being stored in the map, map CRUD operations from BPF programs are disallowed by the eBPF runtime.

```c
typedef ebpf_result_t (*ebpf_process_map_create_t)(
    _In_ void* binding_context,
    uint32_t map_type,
    uint32_t key_size,
    uint32_t value_size,
    uint32_t max_entries,
    _Out_ uint32_t* actual_value_size,
    _Outptr_ void** map_context);
```

---

#### `ebpf_process_map_delete_t` — Map Deletion (required)

eBPF runtime invokes `process_map_delete` to notify the extension that the map is being deleted. The extension

> should free its per-map context.

Reviewer 2: Same question here.  Should this be `preprocess`?

Author: It should be `post-`, updated doc and code.

> eBPF runtime invokes `process_map_delete` to notify the extension that the map is being deleted. The extension

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
eBPF runtime invokes `process_map_delete` to notify the extension that the map has been deleted. The extension
```
Change to "has been" since it's post- not pre-.

```c
typedef void (*ebpf_process_map_delete_t)(
    _In_ void* binding_context,
    _In_ _Post_invalid_ void* map_context);
```

---

#### `ebpf_map_associate_program_type_t` — Associate Program (required)

> eBPF runtime invokes `associate_program_function` before a custom map is associated with a program. The extension

Reviewer 2: Same question here.  Should this be a `pre` name?

Author: updated.

can validate whether the map type is compatible with the given program type.

```c
typedef ebpf_result_t (*ebpf_map_associate_program_type_t)(
    _In_ void* binding_context,
    _In_ void* map_context,
    _In_ const ebpf_program_type_t* program_type);
```

---

#### `ebpf_process_map_find_element_t` — Find Element (optional)

> Called *after* reading from the base map. If the provider sets `updates_original_value` to true, the extension can

Reviewer 2: Rename to `postprocess` then if it's "after" instead of the function to do the actual read.

Author: done.

    size_t out_value_size,
    _Out_writes_opt_(out_value_size) uint8_t* out_value,
    uint32_t flags);
```

---

#### `ebpf_preprocess_map_element_deletion_t` — Delete Element (optional)

Called *before* the entry is deleted from the base map. This allows the extension to perform cleanup (e.g., releasing
kernel resources). The `flags` parameter indicates the context: `EBPF_MAP_OPERATION_UPDATE` if the delete is part of
a replace operation, `EBPF_MAP_OPERATION_MAP_CLEANUP` if the map itself is being destroyed, and
`EBPF_MAP_OPERATION_HELPER` if invoked from a BPF program. When `EBPF_MAP_OPERATION_UPDATE` or
`EBPF_MAP_OPERATION_MAP_CLEANUP` is set, the provider must not fail the deletion.

```c
typedef ebpf_result_t (*ebpf_preprocess_map_element_deletion_t)(
    _In_ void* binding_context,
    _In_ void* map_context,
    size_t key_size,
    _In_reads_opt_(key_size) const uint8_t* key,
    size_t value_size,
    _In_reads_(value_size) const uint8_t* value,
    uint32_t flags);
```

---

#### Flags

The following flags are used with the CRUD dispatch functions:
```c
#define EBPF_MAP_OPERATION_HELPER      0x01 /* Called by a BPF program. When not set, the provider

>                                               * function is called in the context of the original
>                                               * user mode process. */

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                                             * function is called in the context of the original
                                             * user mode process. */
```
Unless it's a github display artifact, it looks like the comments don't line up.

Author: that is a result of format_code script that it has split this in 2 lines.
